Hello and welcome to another episode of AWS Bites podcast.
My name is Luciano and I'm joined by Eoin to discuss a new side project.
I'm currently writing a book about Rust and Lambda.
So today I want to share with you some of the details about this project.
Why do I think that using the Rust programming language
to write Lambda functions is a great idea?
What you can expect from this book and a little bit about the publishing process.
I think that Rust is innovating many areas of the software engineering world
and my bet is that in the coming years we will see it innovating
and improving the world of AWS Lambda as well.
So I hope that this is going to be an interesting episode and let's get into it.
AWS Bites is brought to you by fourTheorem.
If you are looking for a partner to architect, develop and modernize on AWS,
give fourTheorem a call.
By the way, we have also been working with some of our customers,
rewriting some of their most used Lambda functions in Rust,
which is something that greatly reduces cost and improves performance.
So if all of this sounds interesting, check us out on fourTheorem.com.
Okay, I remember episode 64 where we talked about writing Lambda functions in Rust.
So that's not the goal today, I think.
We want to talk a little bit more about the book,
but at the same time, maybe it's worth a quick recap
because that was about a year and a half ago.
I think a lot happens in a year and a half in the Rust and in the Lambda ecosystems.
So do you want to remind us why it might be a good fit for Lambda functions?
Yes, I'll try to do a quick recap about Rust first, and then we'll talk about Rust in the context of Lambda.
Maybe people are not familiar with Rust.
So Rust is a relatively new programming language,
was born to compete with C and C++, mostly in terms of performance,
but the idea was to try to provide a better experience
in terms of a language that is memory safe by default.
And that kind of memory safety is built into the language and the compiler.
It does have a very good and modern toolchain,
and the language itself is very modern as well,
and it takes inspiration by many other languages.
And because it also provides a few different high-level abstractions,
these days Rust has become more of a general-purpose programming language.
So it's not being considered as a system programming language anymore
because you can write from firmware and an operative system and video games,
but also you can write more high-level applications
such as web backends and even web frontends using WebAssembly.
So it's kind of a language that has become general purpose
and you can use it for a variety of projects.
And one of the main things is that software written Rust
can be very memory efficient and very performant
and also based on some research that has been done,
if we look at the consumption in terms of electricity consumption
and CO2 emissions, Rust can also be environmentally friendly,
and it's considered to be one of the most environmentally friendly languages out there.
Now, in the context of Lambda, why Rust is an interesting choice?
We said already that it can be very memory efficient and fast,
so that means that you can lower down the cost,
the execution cost of Lambda function if you write them in Rust.
And just to remind you what's the execution cost,
you basically have to take a unit cost based on the amount of memory
that you allocate for your Lambda function
and multiply that by the number of milliseconds that your execution is lasting.
So with Rust, you generally get Lambda functions
that don't require a lot of memory,
depending of course on the problem that you're solving,
but if you compare an equivalent implementation between,
for instance, JavaScript or Python and Rust,
generally the Rust implementation doesn't require nearly as much memory.
So you can save a lot in terms of allocated memory,
which reduces one unit of cost.
Then, generally speaking, Rust can execute very fast,
especially when you have CPU-bound computation.
So in that case, you are also reducing the number of milliseconds,
most likely, that your execution is going to last.
So basically, you are optimizing on both dimensions
for the Lambda execution cost,
which generally means that if you have a Lambda
that you are executing thousands or even millions of times per day,
if you rewrite that one in Rust,
you are going to probably save a lot of money.
Now, this is of course not the only reason why you should consider Rust.
There are other few reasons that I think are interesting.
Another one is that if you have, let's say, user-facing Lambdas
or Lambdas where you expect to have a very low latency in the response,
you might have occasional cold starts,
and that might be a problem if there is a user waiting for that cold start.
Imagine you are writing like an API
and you want this API to be consistently very responsive and very low latency.
With Rust, you don't avoid the cold start,
but the cold starts are so low,
I've seen in the order of 20 to 40 milliseconds,
that they are becoming basically negligible.
So that's another good use case for considering Rust.
And then there are another few interesting reasons.
One is that, as I mentioned, the language is very modern
and imporals some constructs in the type systems
that will help you to prevent a certain classes of bugs.
So, for instance, there is the result type,
which basically helps you to manage exceptions,
or the option type,
which avoids the classic null pointer exception
that you have in other languages.
So, generally speaking, the programming language itself
helps you to prevent a large class of bugs
and write code that can be generally more correct.
So if you have business-critical applications
where you want to have, I guess, extra peace of mind
that the code that you are writing is probably not going to be bug-free,
but as close to bug-free as possible,
I think Rust can help as well in that direction.
And we also mentioned reducing CO2 emissions.
Lambda is already a great platform for that.
But if you combine that with Rust,
I think you get an even better, I guess, stance
on being environmentally friendly when it comes to compute in the cloud.
Now, again, I want to remind you that we have been speaking a lot
in that previous episode about the whole experience,
how do you get started, the tooling, the pros and cons of using Rust.
So if you're curious about, like, actually, how do you get started
and how do you write your first Lambda in Rust,
I would recommend people to check out that previous episode.
All right, let's talk about your book then.
So what is the title and who's it for?
What's your intended audience?
Or have you thought that much about that so far?
Because a lot of people don't.
Yeah, I would probably say a little bit.
It's probably something subject to change,
but we'll get to the details of that.
The title of the book is called Crafting Lambda Functions in Rust.
There is a website that provides all kinds of information,
and the website is reachable at rust-lambda.com.
The link will be in the show notes as always.
So what is the expected audience?
And this is a bit of a guess at this stage of the book,
but we are imagining the book to be something that is designed
to be accessible to readers that have a very basic knowledge of Rust
and AWS, so not meant to be consumed only by experts,
but also by people that are a little bit entry level
on both Rust and AWS.
We want to try to provide a gentle introduction
to the serverless ecosystem in AWS,
which also means that you don't need to be proficient
with serverless in general, Lambda, or DynamoDB,
and all the other classic serverless services in AWS.
The idea is that, of course, you need to have your own AWS account
and have some very basic knowledge about what you can do with AWS.
So you need to be able to access the dashboard,
maybe know a little bit about IAM,
but you are not expected to be an expert in all things AWS.
And in fact, throughout the book,
we try to introduce all the necessary concepts,
so not just explain what Lambda is,
how does it work internally and how do you start using it,
but then as soon as we start to use Lambda with API Gateway
and DynamoDB and other services like EventBridge,
maybe we introduce those services,
giving, I guess, the fundamental knowledge
that you need to have to understand
how to build something practical with those services.
And we also touch a little bit on infrastructure as code
and we use AWS SAM for that.
As I mentioned, you don't need to be an expert in Rust either,
but of course, we cannot explain everything about Rust
because that would make the book probably thousands of pages.
So just to be practical and pragmatic,
what we suggest is that people should understand
a little bit of the syntax.
And if that's something that you don't know yet,
probably the best thing you can do
is to look at the official Rust book, which is available for free.
And we will have the link at the show notes as a starting point
just to get familiar with the syntax.
So just to summarize, this book is for you
if you are a cloud developer with a passion for serverless,
you have a very basic understanding of the Rust programming language,
at least from a syntax understanding perspective,
you have a basic knowledge of AWS,
and you basically are trying to figure out a new way to build greener,
more efficient and cost-effective serverless solutions.
By the way, I mentioned the we a few times,
so it's definitely worth stating that it's not my own solo side-project.
I've actually been working with a co-author for this,
and the co-author is James Eastham.
And James is an amazing author with lots of experience
with serverless and event-driven systems.
He, by the way, used to work for AWS and recently moved to Datadog,
and he has an amazing YouTube channel that talks a lot about serverless,
AWS, event-driven architecture.
So if all these topics interest you, you should check it out,
and we will have the link in the show notes as well.
So what's the current status of the book?
Is it a work in progress?
How far have you progressed so far?
Yeah, the book is heavily work in progress at this stage.
We started, I think, about two months ago now,
so it's still relatively, it's a good progress project.
And another thing worth mentioning is that it is self-published.
Probably we'll get more into that later.
And the current version, what we have so far is four chapters,
which is about 110 pages or something like that,
around 100 pages, more or less.
And we have the book already available online.
So you can buy it today as an early preview,
and you get about 50% of discount on the expected final price.
And that means that you can download what we have written so far,
and then you will receive all the future updates of the book for free.
And since it's an e-book, you get a few different formats.
So there is a PDF, which also comes in dark mode, if you prefer that.
There is an e-book format, and there is even an HTML format.
So you can read it in whichever format you prefer.
Right now we have four chapters, and those chapters cover,
In the first chapter, we do an introduction to what Lambda is,
what is Rust, why the two together make sense,
which is more or less what we described at the beginning of this episode,
plus a detailed introduction about serverless AWS Lambda,
and how AWS Lambda works under the hood,
because we believe that it's important for you to understand
a few important details about Lambda,
like the internals of Lambda, like what is a runtime,
how different environments are created and reused and destroyed.
So we try to explain all of that just to give you a good context
to understand the computation model.
On chapter two, we start to build a first Lambda function.
It's kind of an L award, and it's just to get familiar with the toolchain,
including Cargo Lambda, which is a CLI tool that you can use to do
scaffolding of new Lambdas, local testing,
building the Lambda for different architectures,
and even publishing the Lambda to AWS.
Then in chapter three, we start to build a more realistic application,
a URL shortener, and we use this opportunity
to start to introduce infrastructure as code and explain what SAM is
and how to use SAM together with Cargo Lambda.
And then in chapter four, which is currently the last chapter we have,
we continue developing that application,
and we bring it to a state where it's more or less working
because we start to persist the data in DynamoDB,
so you can actually create a short URL
and use it across different implications of Lambdas.
And in the process, of course, we need to learn what DynamoDB is,
what are the trade-offs of DynamoDB,
how to use the SDK for Rust to interact with DynamoDB,
and we also learn how to make arbitrary HTTP requests from Lambda
because we want to effectively crawl the URL
for which we are creating the short URL
to establish a title and a description from the page metadata.
So this is just a nice example to see that in a Lambda,
you generally will need to do some kind of HTTP request.
So how do you do that?
What are the different pieces of configuration and libraries
that you can use to do all of that?
So I think this is what we have so far,
and by the end of chapter four,
you have a working implementation of a URL shortener.
It's not perfect because it's still very bare bone
and there are lots of corners that we've cut to get there,
but at least it's something working
that you can deploy in your own account and use it.
That sounds great. You've made a lot of progress in two months,
I think, to have those four chapters out there,
and people can have a look already.
That's really one of the benefits of self-publishing, I guess.
But what about the whole scope?
Do you have an idea of what the whole shape is going to be
by the time you've finished?
What else do you expect to cover?
Yeah, I think ideally what we want to cover
throughout the entire book is not just an introduction
to serverless and Rust in the context of AWS Lambda,
but more making sure we touch on all the things
that you need to be aware if you want to do something
that we can consider production-ready.
So that means that now that we have kind of a skeleton
of an application,
which is definitely not production-ready at this stage,
what is missing to make that production-ready?
And what we see that we should be covering
is things like best practices
in terms of structuring the code.
For instance, if you have multiple Lambda functions
in the same project, which is very common,
how do you organize those in the context of Rust?
And then if you have shared libraries,
which is also very common,
that you need to reuse across these Lambdas,
what is the best way to do that?
And similarly, how do you make your code testable,
especially in an environment like Lambda,
where you generally interact with a lot of external systems,
like for instance, even DynamoDB,
we can imagine it's an external system.
How can you write, for instance, unit tests to cover,
basically, to make sure that your code is working correctly
and run this test and have the kind of extra confidence
that you are doing the right thing?
And also touch about integration tests
and end-to-end tests as well.
Then right now we are only covering HTTP events.
So you are building an API.
So your URL shortener is just effectively an API.
You can use it as an API and that's it.
But what if you want to use other event sources,
for instance, DynamoDB Streams or EventBridge,
or maybe even custom events,
maybe you are building a step function and you have a step,
which is a Lambda written in Rust.
So we want to cover some examples
about these different kinds of events that you can get
and different kinds of integrations
with different AWS services.
And then there is the topic of observability.
So we need to cover how to do good logging, tracing,
integrated with CloudWatch,
maybe explore open telemetry as well,
which seems to be a topic that is more and more discussed
in the context of Lambda.
And it's definitely well supported
in general in the Rust ecosystem.
So trying to see how you can use it together with Lambda
could be interesting.
And then finally, configuration management
and handling secrets.
There are some other topics that we are considering
maybe as an appendix or maybe as advanced chapters.
We'll probably see what happens as we get there.
But there is an interesting middleware system
that is built in in the Rust runtime.
So it could be interesting to show that,
like the capabilities that you have,
to show how you can use existing middlewares,
but even creating your own middleware.
And you can also write Lambda extensions in Rust.
And this is very interesting
because you can use those extensions
even in Lambda functions written in other languages,
like Python or Node.js.
And this is something that, for instance,
if you are somebody that is creating something like Datadog
or other system where you want to collect telemetry
or maybe send data
as part of your Lambda execution life cycle,
you could create a Lambda extension written in Rust,
which will be very efficient and have a minimal impact
on whoever is installing that extension.
So that's something that could be interesting
to explore as well.
And then finally, there are other topics such as
if you want to create like a CI-CD pipeline,
maybe using GitHub action, providing some example
of how you can tie everything together.
And finally, maybe considering alternatives to SAM,
like using CDK or Terraform
because everyone has its own preference.
Of course, we have to pick one
and SAM seems to be the easiest to explain.
But if you are already familiar with CDK and Terraform,
it might be worth explaining
or at least showing some examples
of how you can achieve the same things
by using your favorite infrastructure as code tool.
So it's important to mention that this schedule is not final.
We are trying to get as much feedback as possible
and use that feedback to understand,
okay, what should we be covering next?
Maybe we should focus more on one topic rather than others.
Yeah, look, that sounds fair enough.
A long time ago, well, maybe not that long ago,
but a while back, I wrote a book with Peter Elger
and it was kind of published with Manning.
So there was also an early access program,
but I guess it wasn't self-published.
So we had editorial support along the way.
You've also written a book,
Node.js Design Patterns with Packt.
So what do you think the trade-offs are then
between self-publishing versus going with a publisher?
And why in this instance, with your experience,
did you go for this model?
Yeah, you're definitely saying that there are trade-offs.
I totally agree with that.
There's not like one model is necessarily
better than the other.
I think you need to evaluate the pros and cons
and decide which one is the best.
So I definitely don't regret going with a publisher
for Node.js Design Patterns,
but I was also curious to see what it would look like
to try to do a self-published book.
And I think in general, when you go with a publisher,
the publisher will take care of many aspects of the process.
So you can focus most of your time
on basically the content itself.
So writing down the content and making sure the content
is up to the standards that you want to provide.
So in that case, when you have a publisher,
the publisher will help you a lot,
first of all, to define the structure of the book,
more or less what is in terms of like broad strokes,
that the topic that should be covered
and how to distill down the topic
based on a target audience.
So the publisher will also help you a lot
to make sure that you understand
what is your target audience
and to tune that content to that target audience.
Then one of the things that the publisher does best
is establishing a timeline
and making sure that you stick to that timeline.
They also help you to find reviewers and editors.
They will help you with graphics, layouts, publishing,
all that kind of stuff.
And of course, the big element is also marketing
and branding because of course, with a publisher,
there is a little bit of extra trust that you get
because if people know Manning or Packt,
they will trust that brand probably more
than they will trust an author that they've never seen before.
So as I said, they also make sure that you don't get stuck.
So sometimes when you write a book,
you realize that maybe there is something you don't like
and you want to take a very big change.
I think the publisher will make sure that you evaluate
those kinds of changes really, really well
and you don't end up spinning up in circles
and not really focusing on delivering something
because maybe you keep changing ideas.
So that's also very good for focus
and making sure you actually deliver a complete project
rather than, I don't know,
maybe trying a few different things and then giving up.
And I think all these things are great
if you are a first time book author
because you will need to understand that kind of process.
You'll need to have the diligence.
You'll need to have somebody to support you
and also push you when you need to be pushed.
But on the other end,
there are some other cons to having a publisher.
One that I think is very important
is that you don't really have a lot of flexibility.
So you have to stick to that particular process
that they have in place.
And sometimes that process can be a little bit annoying.
For instance, with Packt,
it means that you need to use Microsoft Word
and all the templates that they provide
without the styling that they have already established,
which of course is good for them
because they want to be consistent with their branding
and they want to be sure the final product
is going to look as they expect.
But if you don't like the kind of tooling
and the kind of way of writing,
it can become very annoying,
especially when you have to write hundreds of pages.
So that's one thing that is worth considering.
Then there is also the financial perspective.
So the publisher takes the bigger share of the revenue.
And even if you are an established author,
maybe you can negotiate a little bit of a better deal,
but it's not going to change the equation significantly.
So that's something to keep into account.
I still think that writing a book
is not something that you do for getting rich.
Realistically, you are not going to pay,
you're not going to get paid
as much as you would get paid
if you were spending the same amount of time
just doing your software engineering job.
So the value of writing a book is not, I guess,
the financial return that you might get from it.
But if you do self-publish,
I think that equation changed significantly
where at least I think you can get your time paid off
well enough if the book is successful.
So that's something else worth considering.
Like if you're looking for a slightly better return,
self-publishing can give you all of that.
But that also means that you have to do all the extra work
that the publisher is doing for you.
So the process itself is more complicated
because you need to spend all that extra time
to do all the things that the publisher
will be doing for you.
In terms of our process,
I'm really happy that we are not using Word
for this particular project,
but we figured out a different tool chain.
In particular, we are using AsciiDoc,
which if people are not familiar with it,
is a language that is somewhat similar to Markdown,
but much more powerful
because it was built effectively to write books.
So there are so many more features
that you don't have in Markdown.
And we found a very good starter template
provided by Liran Tal.
We will have the link in the show notes.
If anyone is curious to see what that looks like,
maybe I think you need to write a book as well.
I think that could be something that saves you
a lot of time because it's already a structure
for you to take care of most of the things,
including for instance, the publishing in different formats
and supporting dark mode for PDFs.
Can I just ask about the build process Luciano?
Actually, I remember that with Manning,
they did, while they had a word option for doing editing,
they also had an AsciiDoc option
where they give you templates
and it was easy enough then to, you know,
build, create a source code repository,
build your book with a GitHub action or whatever
that worked pretty well.
But one of the things I remember
that's really quite time consuming
when you're doing this kind of process
is taking, merging your code samples
and your book content and images as well.
So we were doing an AWS book, so we had code samples,
we had then the source code for the book text itself,
and then we had screenshots,
which were manually screen grabbing,
you know, high DPI, copying in,
having to like manipulate them in various different ways
to make them look right.
And that's actually quite a slow process.
I remember hearing Dave Thomas
from the Pragmatic Programmer
and he has his own publishing company.
And I remember him saying that they set up a build process
that would actually build and test the code in the book
as you're building the book.
So I'm just wondering if you've got any neat tricks
or if you're also just taking a manual approach
when it comes to incorporating those snippets.
Yeah, I know that in AsciiDoc,
you can include snippets from source code directly.
So there is a way to do that.
We are not leveraging that yet
because since we are building like a real application
and we show like a few steps to get to something working,
then if you go on the book repo where you see all the code,
the code is more or less like the final state
of that particular chapter.
So it is a little bit tricky.
Like we cannot just include the final state.
We need to explain all the different steps.
So it is a little bit tricky to reconcile
the actual working code with a step-by-step explanation
of how do you get to write that code.
So right now we are still doing mostly manual things
in that sense.
And yeah, also the other thing is that you might want
to highlight, for instance,
the differences between step one and step two.
And again, that's not something that you implicitly have
in a working code base.
So you need to apply all the formatting in that sense.
And thankfully, AsciiDoc makes that relatively easy,
but there is still a significant amount of manual work
to do all of that.
And it can be painful if at some point you decide
to do a big refactoring.
That means that you need to go back in all the steps
and figure out how do I apply.
Do it all again.
Exactly.
In terms of images, so far we've been using only SVGs
because we don't really have screenshots.
And we created a little tool that allows us to convert
an SVG to the equivalent dark mode.
So basically what it does, inverts the colors,
and then you can specify in the SVG markup
when you don't want the color to be inverted,
for instance, I don't know.
If it's the orange of the lambda icon,
we probably don't want that to be inverted in the dark mode.
So we have a way to do that.
But if we regenerate the base image,
it's just a command line that we need to run
to regenerate the dark mode version.
So that helps a little bit to speed things up.
Nice, so where is the shop front and how are you processing the money side of things
for the book?
Yeah, that's something that we had to research
a little bit.
We ended up choosing Gumroad,
which I don't know if it's the best in terms of pricing
because I think they take a flat 10% of revenue.
And I know that there are other shops
where you can get a better deal.
10% is not necessarily a lot,
depending on the price that you have.
Compared to Apple!
Exactly, but I know that there is, for instance,
Lemon Squeezey, it gives you a better deal in that sense.
But what we were looking for is to have something
that is simple enough to use,
and at the same time that could automatically
split the revenue between the authors.
And apparently Gumroad is the only one we found
where this feature exists.
And this is amazing because from a tax perspective,
everyone receives their own share of the money,
everyone is liable to do their own tax report
if we don't have to create like an intermediate company
or do, I don't know, invoicing
or moving money between the authors.
So all of that management,
which honestly it's something I was a little bit scared about,
is taken care by Gumroad.
So I'm really happy about that aspect.
So the other thing is that in Gumroad
it's very easy to generate discounts if you want,
for instance, maybe you are attending a conference
and you want to create a discount code just for that day
to incentivize people to buy the book
after they hear your talk.
Gumroad makes all of that extremely easy.
So that's another thing that I wasn't missing
from the relationship with the publisher
where you can get discount codes,
but you need to be very careful to ask way in advance.
And sometimes it just doesn't work out
and you lose opportunities.
So yeah, generally speaking right now,
I'm very happy with the whole self-published experience.
I think that the only tricky thing is to try to stick
with some kind of timeline or at least to have a good cadence
even if you don't really have a strict deadline,
but at least make sure that you are progressing steadily
on the book.
And I think being two authors helps a lot
because we can kind of push each other
and try to keep each other accountable.
And that makes sure that we keep progressing
with some kind of a reliable pace.
So I don't know if you have other questions,
otherwise this is, I think,
everything I wanted to share so far.
I'm curious, maybe in the future,
when you're closer to the finish, we can talk about it
and we can go through some of the contents
in a bit more detail and maybe have James on as well.
But that was really interesting.
All I can say is best of luck with it.
Thank you.
Yeah, I'm going to get reading.
Nice, yeah.
We'll definitely have all the links in the show notes again.
And if you end up getting the book,
I'd be really curious to get the feedback,
because again, we are trying to use as much early feedback
as possible to try to drive basically the evolution
of the content itself.
So also I'm curious in general,
if people have considered writing Lambdas and Rust
and why, if they actually tried it,
what the experience was like for them.
So if that's something that you have done
or even just consider, leave us a comment
because I'd be really curious to read about that experience.
So thanks again for being with us today for another episode.
And we look forward to seeing you in the next one.
Bye.